# borderline-SMOTE Algorithm

BSMOTE generates new examples of the minority class using nearest
neighbors of these cases in the border region between classes.

## Usage

``` r
bsmote(df, var, k = 5, over_ratio = 1, all_neighbors = FALSE)
```

## Arguments

- df:

  data.frame or tibble. Must have 1 factor variable and remaining
  numeric variables.

- var:

  Character, name of variable containing factor variable.

- k:

  An integer. Number of nearest neighbor that are used to generate the
  new examples of the minority class.

- over_ratio:

  A numeric value for the ratio of the minority-to-majority frequencies.
  The default value (1) means that all other levels are sampled up to
  have the same frequency as the most occurring level. A value of 0.5
  would mean that the minority levels will have (at most)
  (approximately) half as many rows as the majority level. See
  `vignette("ratio", package = "themis")` for more details.

- all_neighbors:

  Type of two borderline-SMOTE method. Defaults to FALSE. See details.

## Value

A data.frame or tibble, depending on type of `df`.

## Details

This methods works the same way as
[`smote()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/smote.md),
expect that instead of generating points around every point of of the
minority class each point is first being classified into the boxes
"danger" and "not". For each point the k nearest neighbors is
calculated. If all the neighbors comes from a different class it is
labeled noise and put in to the "not" box. If more then half of the
neighbors comes from a different class it is labeled "danger. Points
will be generated around points labeled "danger".

If `all_neighbors = FALSE` then points will be generated between nearest
neighbors in its own class. If `all_neighbors = TRUE` then points will
be generated between any nearest neighbors. See examples for
visualization.

The parameter `neighbors` controls the way the new examples are created.
For each currently existing minority class example X new examples will
be created (this is controlled by the parameter `over_ratio` as
mentioned above). These examples will be generated by using the
information from the `neighbors` nearest neighbor of each example of the
minority class. The parameter `neighbors` controls how many of these
neighbor are used.

All columns used in this step must be numeric with no missing data.

## References

Hui Han, Wen-Yuan Wang, and Bing-Huan Mao. Borderline-smote: a new
over-sampling method in imbalanced data sets learning. In International
Conference on Intelligent Computing, pages 878–887. Springer, 2005.

## See also

[`step_bsmote()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/step_bsmote.md)
for step function of this method

Other Direct Implementations:
[`adasyn()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/adasyn.md),
[`nearmiss()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/nearmiss.md),
[`rose()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/rose.md),
[`smote()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/smote.md),
[`smotenc()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/smotenc.md),
[`tomek()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/tomek.md)

## Examples

``` r
circle_numeric <- circle_example[, c("x", "y", "class")]

res <- bsmote(circle_numeric, var = "class")

res <- bsmote(circle_numeric, var = "class", k = 10)

res <- bsmote(circle_numeric, var = "class", over_ratio = 0.8)

res <- bsmote(circle_numeric, var = "class", all_neighbors = TRUE)
```
