# Apply SMOTENC algorithm

`step_smotenc()` creates a *specification* of a recipe step that
generate new examples of the minority class using nearest neighbors of
these cases. Gower's distance is used to handle mixed data types. For
categorical variables, the most common category along neighbors is
chosen.

## Usage

``` r
step_smotenc(
  recipe,
  ...,
  role = NA,
  trained = FALSE,
  column = NULL,
  over_ratio = 1,
  neighbors = 5,
  skip = TRUE,
  seed = sample.int(10^5, 1),
  id = rand_id("smotenc")
)
```

## Arguments

- recipe:

  A recipe object. The step will be added to the sequence of operations
  for this recipe.

- ...:

  One or more selector functions to choose which variable is used to
  sample the data. See
  [recipes::selections](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/reference/selections.html)
  for more details. The selection should result in *single factor
  variable*. For the `tidy` method, these are not currently used.

- role:

  Not used by this step since no new variables are created.

- trained:

  A logical to indicate if the quantities for preprocessing have been
  estimated.

- column:

  A character string of the variable name that will be populated
  (eventually) by the `...` selectors.

- over_ratio:

  A numeric value for the ratio of the minority-to-majority frequencies.
  The default value (1) means that all other levels are sampled up to
  have the same frequency as the most occurring level. A value of 0.5
  would mean that the minority levels will have (at most)
  (approximately) half as many rows than the majority level.

- neighbors:

  An integer. Number of nearest neighbor that are used to generate the
  new examples of the minority class.

- skip:

  A logical. Should the step be skipped when the recipe is baked by
  [`bake()`](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/reference/bake.html)? While
  all operations are baked when
  [`prep()`](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/reference/prep.html) is run,
  some operations may not be able to be conducted on new data (e.g.
  processing the outcome variable(s)). Care should be taken when using
  `skip = TRUE` as it may affect the computations for subsequent
  operations.

- seed:

  An integer that will be used as the seed when smote-ing.

- id:

  A character string that is unique to this step to identify it.

## Value

An updated version of `recipe` with the new step added to the sequence
of existing steps (if any). For the `tidy` method, a tibble with columns
`terms` which is the variable used to sample.

## Details

The parameter `neighbors` controls the way the new examples are created.
For each currently existing minority class example X new examples will
be created (this is controlled by the parameter `over_ratio` as
mentioned above). These examples will be generated by using the
information from the `neighbors` nearest neighbor of each example of the
minority class. The parameter `neighbors` controls how many of these
neighbor are used.

All columns in the data are sampled and returned by
[`recipes::juice()`](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/reference/juice.html)
and
[`recipes::bake()`](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/reference/bake.html).

Columns can be numeric and categorical with no missing data.

When used in modeling, users should strongly consider using the option
`skip = TRUE` so that the extra sampling is *not* conducted outside of
the training set.

## Tidying

When you
[`tidy()`](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/reference/tidy.recipe.html)
this step, a tibble is retruned with columns `terms` and `id`:

- terms:

  character, the selectors or variables selected

- id:

  character, id of this step

## Tuning Parameters

This step has 2 tuning parameters:

- `over_ratio`: Over-Sampling Ratio (type: double, default: 1)

- `neighbors`: \# Nearest Neighbors (type: integer, default: 5)

## Case weights

The underlying operation does not allow for case weights.

## References

Chawla, N. V., Bowyer, K. W., Hall, L. O., and Kegelmeyer, W. P. (2002).
Smote: Synthetic minority over-sampling technique. Journal of Artificial
Intelligence Research, 16:321-357.

## See also

[`smotenc()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/smotenc.md)
for direct implementation

Other Steps for over-sampling:
[`step_adasyn()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/step_adasyn.md),
[`step_bsmote()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/step_bsmote.md),
[`step_rose()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/step_rose.md),
[`step_smote()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/step_smote.md),
[`step_upsample()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/step_upsample.md)

## Examples

``` r
library(recipes)
library(modeldata)
data(hpc_data)

orig <- count(hpc_data, class, name = "orig")
orig
#> # A tibble: 4 × 2
#>   class  orig
#>   <fct> <int>
#> 1 VF     2211
#> 2 F      1347
#> 3 M       514
#> 4 L       259

up_rec <- recipe(class ~ ., data = hpc_data) |>
  step_impute_knn(all_predictors()) |>
  # Bring the minority levels up to about 1000 each
  # 1000/2211 is approx 0.4523
  step_smotenc(class, over_ratio = 0.4523) |>
  prep()

training <- up_rec |>
  bake(new_data = NULL) |>
  count(class, name = "training")
training
#> # A tibble: 4 × 2
#>   class training
#>   <fct>    <int>
#> 1 VF        2211
#> 2 F         1347
#> 3 M         1000
#> 4 L         1000

# Since `skip` defaults to TRUE, baking the step has no effect
baked <- up_rec |>
  bake(new_data = hpc_data) |>
  count(class, name = "baked")
baked
#> # A tibble: 4 × 2
#>   class baked
#>   <fct> <int>
#> 1 VF     2211
#> 2 F      1347
#> 3 M       514
#> 4 L       259

# Note that if the original data contained more rows than the
# target n (= ratio * majority_n), the data are left alone:
orig |>
  left_join(training, by = "class") |>
  left_join(baked, by = "class")
#> # A tibble: 4 × 4
#>   class  orig training baked
#>   <fct> <int>    <int> <int>
#> 1 VF     2211     2211  2211
#> 2 F      1347     1347  1347
#> 3 M       514     1000   514
#> 4 L       259     1000   259
```
