# Apply borderline-SMOTE Algorithm

`step_bsmote()` creates a *specification* of a recipe step that generate
new examples of the minority class using nearest neighbors of these
cases in the border region between classes.

## Usage

``` r
step_bsmote(
  recipe,
  ...,
  role = NA,
  trained = FALSE,
  column = NULL,
  over_ratio = 1,
  neighbors = 5,
  all_neighbors = FALSE,
  skip = TRUE,
  seed = sample.int(10^5, 1),
  id = rand_id("bsmote")
)
```

## Arguments

- recipe:

  A recipe object. The step will be added to the sequence of operations
  for this recipe.

- ...:

  One or more selector functions to choose which variable is used to
  sample the data. See
  [recipes::selections](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/reference/selections.html)
  for more details. The selection should result in *single factor
  variable*. For the `tidy` method, these are not currently used.

- role:

  Not used by this step since no new variables are created.

- trained:

  A logical to indicate if the quantities for preprocessing have been
  estimated.

- column:

  A character string of the variable name that will be populated
  (eventually) by the `...` selectors.

- over_ratio:

  A numeric value for the ratio of the minority-to-majority frequencies.
  The default value (1) means that all other levels are sampled up to
  have the same frequency as the most occurring level. A value of 0.5
  would mean that the minority levels will have (at most)
  (approximately) half as many rows as the majority level.

- neighbors:

  An integer. Number of nearest neighbor that are used to generate the
  new examples of the minority class.

- all_neighbors:

  Type of two borderline-SMOTE method. Defaults to FALSE. See details.

- skip:

  A logical. Should the step be skipped when the recipe is baked by
  [`bake()`](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/reference/bake.html)? While
  all operations are baked when
  [`prep()`](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/reference/prep.html) is run,
  some operations may not be able to be conducted on new data (e.g.
  processing the outcome variable(s)). Care should be taken when using
  `skip = TRUE` as it may affect the computations for subsequent
  operations.

- seed:

  An integer that will be used as the seed when smote-ing.

- id:

  A character string that is unique to this step to identify it.

## Value

An updated version of `recipe` with the new step added to the sequence
of existing steps (if any). For the `tidy` method, a tibble with columns
`terms` which is the variable used to sample.

## Details

This methods works the same way as
[`step_smote()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/step_smote.md),
expect that instead of generating points around every point of of the
minority class each point is first being classified into the boxes
"danger" and "not". For each point the k nearest neighbors is
calculated. If all the neighbors comes from a different class it is
labeled noise and put in to the "not" box. If more then half of the
neighbors comes from a different class it is labeled "danger. Points
will be generated around points labeled "danger".

If all_neighbors = FALSE then points will be generated between nearest
neighbors in its own class. If all_neighbors = TRUE then points will be
generated between any nearest neighbors. See examples for visualization.

The parameter `neighbors` controls the way the new examples are created.
For each currently existing minority class example X new examples will
be created (this is controlled by the parameter `over_ratio` as
mentioned above). These examples will be generated by using the
information from the `neighbors` nearest neighbor of each example of the
minority class. The parameter `neighbors` controls how many of these
neighbor are used.

All columns in the data are sampled and returned by
[`recipes::juice()`](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/reference/juice.html)
and
[`recipes::bake()`](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/reference/bake.html).

All columns used in this step must be numeric with no missing data.

When used in modeling, users should strongly consider using the option
`skip = TRUE` so that the extra sampling is *not* conducted outside of
the training set.

## Minimum observations

Each minority class must have at least `neighbors + 1` observations to
perform the BSMOTE algorithm.

## Tidying

When you
[`tidy()`](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/reference/tidy.recipe.html)
this step, a tibble is returned with columns `terms` and `id`:

- terms:

  character, the selectors or variables selected

- id:

  character, id of this step

## Tuning Parameters

This step has 3 tuning parameters:

- `over_ratio`: Over-Sampling Ratio (type: double, default: 1)

- `neighbors`: \# Nearest Neighbors (type: integer, default: 5)

- `all_neighbors`: All Neighbors (type: logical, default: FALSE)

## Case weights

The underlying operation does not allow for case weights.

## References

Hui Han, Wen-Yuan Wang, and Bing-Huan Mao. Borderline-smote: a new
over-sampling method in imbalanced data sets learning. In International
Conference on Intelligent Computing, pages 878–887. Springer, 2005.

## See also

[`bsmote()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/bsmote.md) for
direct implementation

Other Steps for over-sampling:
[`step_adasyn()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/step_adasyn.md),
[`step_rose()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/step_rose.md),
[`step_smote()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/step_smote.md),
[`step_smotenc()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/step_smotenc.md),
[`step_upsample()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/step_upsample.md)

## Examples

``` r
library(recipes)
library(modeldata)
data(hpc_data)

hpc_data0 <- hpc_data |>
  select(-protocol, -day)

orig <- count(hpc_data0, class, name = "orig")
orig
#> # A tibble: 4 × 2
#>   class  orig
#>   <fct> <int>
#> 1 VF     2211
#> 2 F      1347
#> 3 M       514
#> 4 L       259

up_rec <- recipe(class ~ ., data = hpc_data0) |>
  # Bring the minority levels up to about 1000 each
  # 1000/2211 is approx 0.4523
  step_bsmote(class, over_ratio = 0.4523) |>
  prep()

training <- up_rec |>
  bake(new_data = NULL) |>
  count(class, name = "training")
training
#> # A tibble: 4 × 2
#>   class training
#>   <fct>    <int>
#> 1 VF        2211
#> 2 F         1347
#> 3 M         1000
#> 4 L         1000

# Since `skip` defaults to TRUE, baking the step has no effect
baked <- up_rec |>
  bake(new_data = hpc_data0) |>
  count(class, name = "baked")
baked
#> # A tibble: 4 × 2
#>   class baked
#>   <fct> <int>
#> 1 VF     2211
#> 2 F      1347
#> 3 M       514
#> 4 L       259

# Note that if the original data contained more rows than the
# target n (= ratio * majority_n), the data are left alone:
orig |>
  left_join(training, by = "class") |>
  left_join(baked, by = "class")
#> # A tibble: 4 × 4
#>   class  orig training baked
#>   <fct> <int>    <int> <int>
#> 1 VF     2211     2211  2211
#> 2 F      1347     1347  1347
#> 3 M       514     1000   514
#> 4 L       259     1000   259

library(ggplot2)

ggplot(circle_example, aes(x, y, color = class)) +
  geom_point() +
  labs(title = "Without SMOTE")


recipe(class ~ x + y, data = circle_example) |>
  step_bsmote(class, all_neighbors = FALSE) |>
  prep() |>
  bake(new_data = NULL) |>
  ggplot(aes(x, y, color = class)) +
  geom_point() +
  labs(title = "With borderline-SMOTE, all_neighbors = FALSE")


recipe(class ~ x + y, data = circle_example) |>
  step_bsmote(class, all_neighbors = TRUE) |>
  prep() |>
  bake(new_data = NULL) |>
  ggplot(aes(x, y, color = class)) +
  geom_point() +
  labs(title = "With borderline-SMOTE, all_neighbors = TRUE")
```
