# Apply SMOTEN algorithm

`step_smoten()` creates a *specification* of a recipe step that generate
new examples of the minority class using nearest neighbors of these
cases, for data sets where all predictors are categorical (nominal). The
Value Difference Metric (VDM) is used to measure the distance between
observations. For each predictor, the most common category among
neighbors is chosen.

## Usage

``` r
step_smoten(
  recipe,
  ...,
  role = NA,
  trained = FALSE,
  column = NULL,
  over_ratio = 1,
  neighbors = 5,
  skip = TRUE,
  seed = sample.int(10^5, 1),
  id = rand_id("smoten")
)
```

## Arguments

- recipe:

  A recipe object. The step will be added to the sequence of operations
  for this recipe.

- ...:

  One or more selector functions to choose which variable is used to
  sample the data. See
  [recipes::selections](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/reference/selections.html)
  for more details. The selection should result in *single factor
  variable*. For the `tidy` method, these are not currently used.

- role:

  Not used by this step since no new variables are created.

- trained:

  A logical to indicate if the quantities for preprocessing have been
  estimated.

- column:

  A character string of the variable name that will be populated
  (eventually) by the `...` selectors.

- over_ratio:

  A numeric value for the ratio of the minority-to-majority frequencies.
  The default value (1) means that all other levels are sampled up to
  have the same frequency as the most occurring level. A value of 0.5
  would mean that the minority levels will have (at most)
  (approximately) half as many rows as the majority level. See
  `vignette("ratio", package = "themis")` for more details.

- neighbors:

  An integer. Number of nearest neighbor that are used to generate the
  new examples of the minority class.

- skip:

  A logical. Should the step be skipped when the recipe is baked by
  [`bake()`](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/reference/bake.html)? While
  all operations are baked when
  [`prep()`](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/reference/prep.html) is run,
  some operations may not be able to be conducted on new data (e.g.
  processing the outcome variable(s)). Care should be taken when using
  `skip = TRUE` as it may affect the computations for subsequent
  operations.

- seed:

  An integer that will be used as the seed when smote-ing.

- id:

  A character string that is unique to this step to identify it.

## Value

An updated version of `recipe` with the new step added to the sequence
of existing steps (if any). For the `tidy` method, a tibble with columns
`terms` which is the variable used to sample.

## Details

SMOTEN is a variant of SMOTE designed for data sets where all predictors
are categorical (nominal). Since standard SMOTE relies on interpolation
in continuous space, it cannot be applied to categorical features
directly. SMOTEN instead uses the Value Difference Metric (VDM) to
measure the distance between observations. For each minority class
example, new synthetic examples are generated by taking the most common
value of each predictor among its nearest neighbors. The number of new
examples generated is controlled by `over_ratio`.

All columns in the data are sampled and returned by
[`recipes::juice()`](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/reference/juice.html)
and
[`recipes::bake()`](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/reference/bake.html).

All predictor columns must be categorical (factor or character) with no
missing data.

When used in modeling, users should strongly consider using the option
`skip = TRUE` so that the extra sampling is *not* conducted outside of
the training set.

## Minimum observations

Each minority class must have at least `neighbors + 1` observations to
perform the SMOTEN algorithm.

## Tidying

When you
[`tidy()`](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/reference/tidy.recipe.html)
this step, a tibble is returned with columns `terms` and `id`:

- terms:

  character, the selectors or variables selected

- id:

  character, id of this step

## Tuning Parameters

This step has 2 tuning parameters:

- `over_ratio`: Over-Sampling Ratio (type: double, default: 1)

- `neighbors`: \# Nearest Neighbors (type: integer, default: 5)

## Case weights

The underlying operation does not allow for case weights. Supplying data
with a case weights column to this step results in an error.

## References

Chawla, N. V., Bowyer, K. W., Hall, L. O., and Kegelmeyer, W. P. (2002).
Smote: Synthetic minority over-sampling technique. Journal of Artificial
Intelligence Research, 16:321-357.

## See also

[`smoten()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/smoten.md) for
direct implementation

Other Steps for over-sampling:
[`step_adasyn()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/step_adasyn.md),
[`step_bsmote()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/step_bsmote.md),
[`step_rose()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/step_rose.md),
[`step_smogn()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/step_smogn.md),
[`step_smote()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/step_smote.md),
[`step_smotenc()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/step_smotenc.md),
[`step_svmsmote()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/step_svmsmote.md),
[`step_upsample()`](https://themis.tidymodels.org/dev/reference/step_upsample.md)

## Examples

``` r
library(recipes)
library(modeldata)
data(hpc_data)

hpc_cat <- hpc_data[, c("class", "protocol", "day")]

orig <- count(hpc_cat, class, name = "orig")
orig
#> # A tibble: 4 × 2
#>   class  orig
#>   <fct> <int>
#> 1 VF     2211
#> 2 F      1347
#> 3 M       514
#> 4 L       259

up_rec <- recipe(class ~ ., data = hpc_cat) |>
  step_smoten(class) |>
  prep()

training <- up_rec |>
  bake(new_data = NULL) |>
  count(class, name = "training")
training
#> # A tibble: 4 × 2
#>   class training
#>   <fct>    <int>
#> 1 VF        2211
#> 2 F         2211
#> 3 M         2211
#> 4 L         2211

# Since `skip` defaults to TRUE, baking the step has no effect
baked <- up_rec |>
  bake(new_data = hpc_cat) |>
  count(class, name = "baked")
baked
#> # A tibble: 4 × 2
#>   class baked
#>   <fct> <int>
#> 1 VF     2211
#> 2 F      1347
#> 3 M       514
#> 4 L       259
```
